the topic of today's video is neither  directly nor indirectly related to  veganism but i noticed the first comment  in my comment section is about veganism  not that surprising if you know a little  bit about me or about my channel and i'm  probably going to mention veganism  a few times as a useful sort of parallel  or useful sort of contrasting example  but  two parallel lines by definition will  never intersect  these two things we're discussing  although comparable  are very much discreet  it's one thing as a vegan to  [Music]  deal with people  who just never thought about  any of the ethical issues involved in  veganism it's never occurred  and you know sometimes people pretend  sometimes people you know uh  have an artifice about them you know of  uh  acting out the role of someone who's  never thought about these things when  really they have when really they've put  quite a lot of thought into justifying  why it is they eat meat right if they're  not vegan sometimes people pretend they  haven't thought it through and in fact  they turned out to be ex-vegetarian or  ex-vegan or they had an ex-boyfriend who  was a vegetarian or vegan they've put a  lot of thought into it but sometimes you  really deal with people for whom this  these are just new and unfamiliar  concepts they've never applied their  intelligence they've never provided  they've never applied their powers of  analysis to this part of their life at  all  and then obviously you deal with a  certain kind of reluctance on their part  to look back and regret  the ethical decisions they've made let's  say over 10 years leading up to the  conversation you're having  and quite possibly including ethical  decisions they made that same day what  they eat for lunch and maybe you're  having the conversation over dinner  um  now  regret  is already i think of tremendous  philosophical significance tremendous  political significance  it's already a complex difficult to  understand topic that's very very  different from one culture to the next  dealing with regret  in a japanese context in the 21st  century very different from a western  european  context and dealing with regret in  western europe in the 21st century very  different from the 18th century so on  and so forth you know  what the process is of going into  examining and recognizing the extent to  which you yourself were wrong and you  were self were culpable  um  with examples like  veganism you know um  the quality of regret  and the qualitative aspects of  understanding  why and how people refuse to reflect  refuse to analyze refuse to take  responsibility refuse to regret the the  qualitative aspects of the refusal to  admit your own  wrongdoing they're extraordinary and  they're very difficult to compare to  anything else now briefly digress with  the caveat or even stated these things  are quite quite specific to your culture  sometimes specific to your gender and  ethnicity and subculture and so on and  so forth like i think it can be  genuinely said that the concept of sin  is very different in judaism as opposed  to christianity it may be very different  in catholicism than it is in mormonism  or you know within christianity  different contrasts could be could be  drawn up you know and  by the same token  um  it can be said that you know jewish  people may experience regret and the  reluctance to reflect on their own  actions and and regret them in a way  that's really qualitatively different  from a  catholic person from a certain type of  protestant person uh so on and so forth  um  with all those caveats have been stated  it's remarkable to me  that i've spoken to so many cigarette  smokers  who could say with no hesitation in a  sense they could say with no self-doubt  with no agony  um  that they regret smoking cigarettes for  10 years  and they don't feel weak when they're  doing it you know if anything they feel  strong you know they look back and they  say this is this terrible thing that was  such a big part of their life now many  of you might be thinking about the  possibility of getting cancer but that's  only a possibility a huge percentage of  people who smoke cigarettes never get  lung cancer you know uh when i've spoken  to people face to face very often what  they regret are things that actually did  happen things that weren't hypothetical  just give an example saying oh i  remember  you know fighting with my ex-girlfriend  so much i remember having to go outside  and smoke cigarettes because my  girlfriend didn't want me smoking in the  apartment and then i'd fight with her  about that so again compared to dying of  cancer this may seem  trivial but if it goes on for 10 years  it's not a trivial part of your life  they look back and realize they were  justifying all of these conflicts with  their girlfriend they were instigating  they were the cause of these conflicts  with their girlfriend and possibly  conflicts with their parents conflicts  with their co-workers conflicts of their  body that these things all hinged on  this habit they were attached to that  nail  in hindsight uh they can they can look  back on it and regret it  okay  it's remarkable to me  that people  are so much more reluctant  to engage in this kind of reflection and  regret about  the difference between a meat-eating  diet and a vegan diet and  you know  even within my own culture i have to ask  why  why why is it so different from smoking  cigarettes why is it so hard for you  people you know and look you know we all  have different kinds of talents maybe  i'm especially talented at regret you  know what i mean like maybe that's one  of my personal strengths is i'm really  good at regretting things and maybe  other people aren't um  now  i said before  you know actually a frighteningly small  percentage of people have serious health  consequences from smoking cigarettes  there may be smaller things they can  notice they may smoke cigarettes and  notice it's harder for them to walk up a  staircase you know they may have these  kinds  it's kind of astounding by contrast what  a large percentage of people have  negative health consequences from eating  a non-vegan diet from eating meat  milk eggs  etc  you know  melissa and i we know an amazing variety  of people who have had serious serious  negative health consequences from eating  meat milk dairy nets from eating from  eating cholesterol in brief  and  point one we're not that old  yet  when i'm when i'm in my 50s when i'm in  my 60s how many of these people am i  gonna know right and point two we don't  know that many people we don't have that  many friends we're not that welcome to  if you have a huge social circle you  know a lot of people have had heart  attacks and other cholesterol-related  ailments so i'd have you know okay well  it's a it's a bigger it's a bigger  survey and i've got to say it's really  striking to me  how reluctant they are to regret  these decisions now i said very briefly  at the beginning of this video regret is  significant philosophically regret is  significant um politically  i knew a man  i honestly can't remember his name now  i'd have to go dig through my email  history and he was slightly famous  in the history and politics of cambodia  so he was famous to people like me who  really cared about the history and  politics component and people read  english because with cambodia there are  people who read in cambodian they're  people who read english and they're also  people who read french there's a big  french language literature in cambodia  it's kind of a different scene the  francophone  politics of cambodia  real lively scene in paris and some of  the suburbs that have a big cambodian xl  population you can imagine  and you know um  it really haunted me it really disturbed  me that i had a direct eyewitness  testimony from a very elderly man who  knew who known uh this  white western  author about the history campaign who'd  known him for many years and he this  this eyewitness told me you know that  guy he really was pro-communist he  really did support the khmer rouge and  paul pot at a certain stage  of that historical development now i was  kind of furious and astounded by this  this is  my fundamental problem is  i can't believe anyone would be that  stupid  um i'm in my 40s i hope i'm over it now  but  wow it was it it has been a struggle and  maybe it still is a struggle for me to  really engage in discussion analysis  instead with the profound assumption  people can be that stupid you know and  you see things differently  um but anyway this guy i read his i'd  read his work read is formally published  researched written work  and what i couldn't accept about that  wasn't that he had made a mistake and  later changed his mind it's that i had  never  seen him write a single  word of regret  you know i mean there are different  forms of communism in the history of the  world but i mean one of  the most egregious the most outrageous i  mean you know  if you knew someone and they'd been a  communist in japan  in the 1930s and then they changed their  mind in the 1940s you know well okay  communism within japan  you know okay maybe maybe they weren't  so crazy it was  how is it possible  for someone who could read and write the  cambodian language fluently a highly  educated you know white western man  how is it how is it possible for this  particular man  to have supported  paul pot specifically the khmer rouge  specific this extreme form of communism  specifically and then in writing books  about this stuff years later to not have  real soul searching real regret i mean i  want to want to see the agony on the  page i want to see it spilling out thing  it's very very  alien to me  and um  [Music]  you know i knew this guy to some extent  and  i mean look the point of my telling this  story now is really for me to just tell  you how much that chewed me up like how  much that hurt me  emotionally that i didn't know  how to deal with it  now some of you guys don't know much  about the history of cambodia the  history of communism in cambodia okay  some of you may have met people face to  face in real life  or  here on the internet who in a sense are  nazis  people who are neo-nazis you know  but those are mostly people who are just  kind of playing a game with words and  abstract ideas and that they may be  trying to get followers on instagram and  they may be trying to shock and horrify  their own parents to be different kinds  of  games going on in their own head  it's very different to meet and talk to  someone who was alive at that time who  was there who was involved  who in that sense  was a nazi and i'll tell you something  it doesn't it doesn't really matter that  much whether or not they literally have  blood on their hands like if you met  someone who was a journalist but they  were alive at that time they were a  journalist supporting the nazi party and  supporting the atrocities you know it's  maybe that's much more disturbing  maybe that's much worse  than meeting and dealing with someone  who who was just a normal rank-and-file  soldier someone who just followed orders  and pulled triggers  in the army fighting for the nazi side  uh well okay so my encounter with that  particular scholar of  of buddhism scholar of the history of  cambodia et cetera i covered all these  basis to some extent  um and really a cambodian specialist  uh  sure that's like the shocking discovery  that someone you know really was a part  of uh the nazi party in that period when  they had power when they were committing  atrocities and you know there are  different ways to measure  the number of people massacred but  the khmer rouge they are one of the very  few regimes in the history of the world  that at least have a credible claim  like when being compared to the nazis  like who was worse the body count and  the violence it's so extraordinary in  such a short span of time  uh the khmer rouge are certainly on the  list  of the worst examples uh in the history  of the human race  were they actually worse than adolf  hitler in the nazis oh it's certainly a  judgment call but anyway they're on the  they're in everybody's top ten list for  the worst examples of human nature  not just in the 20th century but in the  whole history of the  of the human race so  you know  i  i'm aware  that i kind of do live my life  with this sort of unstated demand  that there are things people ought to  regret  you know  and  i have i have to admit a certain kind of  outrage  uh not the people made mistakes  not that people made the wrong decisions  my outrage is knowing what you know  now  looking back now why can't you  regret it  um  i don't think i'm  extraordinary in this respect but i  might be unusual  in thinking it through in such a kind of  crystal clear form and expressing it to  my friends you know what i mean  expressing it to my other people i know  in my life friends relatives colleagues  what have you um  that's really a requirement i have with  people in my life you know it's one  thing to do  an evil act and you know evil acts they  can be deeply personal they can be very  subtle you know it could be just  something you said to someone uh you  know in your own personal life maybe in  your professional life too but might not  be actions that have a body count or  have easily palpable consequences but  you know i i think it's one thing for  somebody who said something that that's  really terrible whether to you or  someone else and it's another thing when  you when you say to them afterwards  maybe days afterwards maybe years  afterwards you know oh look looking back  don't you regret that now  don't you regret you know what you did  so i think i think regret it's um  it's tremendously significant  philosophically politically and in this  sense  uh personally you know  you are  what you regret  maybe to a much greater extent than you  are what you do that you are what you  know what you learn you know you're very  limited in what you can learn  we can all look back and regret our own  ignorance what it is you have the  opportunity to learn what has even  occurred to you to research or look into  or question you know you can remain  ignorant about things your whole life or  for decades again actually veganism is a  good example i've met people who got to  their later years middle age or elderly  and they never questioned where milk  comes from they never questioned how  cheese was made they really never  thought about it yeah it's  they never asked the question they never  did a google search  where does cheese come from how has this  happened  you know that's very alien for me i'm  just a very curious person in that way  but you know where they sincerely you  never thought about it okay so you know  what you know  it tells me a lot about you but it  doesn't tell me everything what you do  you know the decisions you make the  actions you take the initiative you show  tells me something about you it doesn't  doesn't tell you anything but regret  what you regret and what you refuse to  regret  it runs deep it tells me a lot about who  you are  and when you look in the mirror uh for  any of you i think you i think you feel  me i think you know what i'm talking  about here uh whether they are things  very personal and you know trivial in  terms of their consequences terrible  things you did to someone else that may  have just been words you've spoken  things that you've done that harm people  or you know very material things  things with real world palpable  consequences um  in our regrets we reveal to ourselves  and others who we really are  now  i only know  one person  who took up the position of  moral nihilism we could say moral  aestheticism i'm going to describe and  define those terms just a second  get into semantics in a second  i only know one person  who had adopted the position of  moral nihilism  and then reverted to switch to went back  to believing in moral realism more  realism here meaning that there is an  objectively real sense in which  something is morally good morally evil  good or bad  uh  and that is you know i have to admit to  myself that is strange and disturbing to  me in the same sort of way  that  somebody being ex-vegan someone who's  lived as a vegan let's say for two years  and then makes the decision to go back  to eating meat that's more disturbing to  me than someone who's just never thought  about it who's never been vegan at all  and again in some cases you have to  accept  never thought about it it can really  mean  never gave any thought to it never made  excuses never analyzed it people can  live in total ignorance  well you know if you were vegan for two  years  and i saw you come on youtube and give  arguments in favor of veganism i saw you  refute  arguments against veganism it's very  hard for me to accept that now you've  you've switched sides  it's much harder for me it's more  disturbing for me right  and yes in most cases  the people's reasons are just laughable  they're just ridiculous  they are reasons that nobody could or  should take seriously  it's still disturbing for me  it's still upsetting for me  do you think  my father had good reasons for  supporting  joseph stalin  no  they were laughable i mean even for a  child i could refute them as a child  do you think my father had good reasons  for supporting mao zedong and his  masters no  right still disturbing it's still  upsetting right  and why  because those are  excuses he lived by those are those  ideas those decisions those moral  compromises those beliefs if you like  had real world consequences so no matter  how stupid no matter how preposterous no  matter how laughable they are right  still upsetting still disturbance still  matters and i tell you it's still it  still matters to me  um  so i have to take a moment here i think  to describe to you and this may be the  most important part of the video for a  program any of you  the sense in which  nihilism matters  in ethics because i think it really does  matter i don't think this is just a  philosophical um  this isn't a philosophical parlor trick  this isn't a game being played on a  chalkboard  that doesn't have consequences people in  there in their real lives and  i'm going to say something for this is  the most flattering thing i can say  about the other side of this argument  the arguments in favor of eating meat  are fundamentally just boring to me like  they're really not interesting they're  not really worth thinking about or  understanding in depth  you know  the arguments people give to justify  smoking marijuana i also find incredibly  boring i mean oh uh  in most cases both the justifications  for eating meat and the justifications  are smoking marijuana they they don't  amount to much more than people enjoy  them and whatever they enjoy they're  gonna make excuses for it's not there  gotta tell you something the  excuses for and the justifications for  moral realism they are interesting and i  can even say that they are important  this is a rare case of an argument where  from my perspective as a nihilist i can  really say i think that both sides of  the argument are worth hearing and worth  understanding and worth treating in some  depth  now  i admit i haven't described or defined  yet moral realism  um  of course it's wrong  of course  it's almost laughably self-evidently  wrong  in what sense  can one  moral judgment  be correct and true for all people at  all times in the same way that  a law of physics like gravity is correct  and true for all people at all times  regardless of whether or not you're  living in a culture that understands  gravity whether or not you're living in  a culture that even has words in its own  language for gravity or let alone  science and specific uh  mathematical formula to  quantify gravity  i mean another example here is uh the  value of pi  not p-i-e but p-i you know these  mathematical relationships between  geometric figures  and you can say in a sense this is true  in all times for all people in all  places now another one that's actually a  little bit a little bit more dubious  people make these claims about music  also uh anthropologists a dug up  i think it was a flute made of bone  i'm sorry this is i believe this is more  than ten thousand years ago it was  really really ancient  and they were able to scan it with some  kind of computer technology so there's a  bone and had been hauled out in the  middle and holes have been drilled in it  to make a flute  and so i'm sorry but let's let's say it  was ten thousand years ago for the sake  of argument and they were able to prove  that already at that time  before the development of writing for  the development of our culture and  civilization human beings already had  the same sense  of tune and harmony that some of the  properties of music were already true  with this uh you know the idea of what  the gap should be between two notes or  two octaves or something there were some  things that were that were consistent  true well all right now we can argue  against this the idea of what music or  harmony is there ought to be was it  really the same in ancient china ancient  india ancient europe and those  interesting examples of music because we  have written records for these things  for what music was in ancient china uh  we have evidence to work from what music  was in ancient  australia the indigenous people of  australia another interesting question  anyway you know  this idea of something being  um  objectively  real  and that morality and that the judgments  of ethics and the distinction between  good and evil right and wrong  um  that this can be  true at all natural people i think what  makes it interesting what makes it  worthwhile to really think through that  side of the argument very thoroughly  even though it's incorrect  is closely parallel to the way in which  gender equality  may be  descriptively false  but still have a kind of prescriptive  value this is going to be much easier to  understand with examples than  abstract reasoning you know  let's say we have a society that decides  equality between the genders is really  important  so therefore  when  people apply to work for the fire  department  we are going to have exactly the same  tests applied to men and women now some  of those tests are intellectual but a  lot of the tests for working in the fire  department for being a fireman as we  still say  it's a gender specific term  they deal with your ability to for  example lift  another human being and carry them out  of a room or carry them out of a  building you know  perhaps when surrounded by smoke and  fire perhaps in very difficult  circumstances a lot of brute strength  involved right  so if we  commit to  the abstract idea of gender equality  and that can be stated in the following  format it can be stated as committing to  the axiom that men and women are equal  now  do we really mean that what if what we  really mean is that  men and women should be treated as if  they're equal even when there are some  inequalities  well a counter-argument which probably  wherever you're living in the world  whether in europe or north america not  if you live in saudi arabia not if you  live in afghanistan but many of you are  living in parts of the world had to  address this is a real world problem  debate because if you embrace gender  equality in that sense  then the result will be that you have  astoundingly few women  working in the fire department some  women will be able to pass the same  tests as the men some  however  the women the tiny minority of women who  are strong enough to meet those  standards  they instead have the option of being an  olympic athlete  like this is part of your competing  there are a lot of really good jobs  those women can have and then you get  into this in the military also like okay  well if you're only interested in women  who are over six feet tall who can do a  certain number of chin-ups they exist  you know some women are stronger than  some men and whatever will that tiny  minority of women have a lot of really  interesting job opportunities in life  that's why they may not be willing to  become a  fireman as we still say  fireworker you know what should i say  that um  a fire extinguishment employee you know  uh and they may not be willing to to  work for the military so if that's the  principle of gender equality that you  take and put into practice right the  outcomes  may be  unequal they may exacerbate inequality  the result is that in the entire fire  department you have 800 men and only  five women or you may have zero it's  hard to deal with it's really hard to  deal with now at the opposite extreme  and i have lived in places where this  was an ongoing controversy they have  systems where for the sake of gender  equality they have unequal standards for  men's equipment and they have the same  tests but it's you know if you're a  woman you have to lift less weight and  you have to run up and down fewer stairs  while carrying less weight and this kind  of thing  well the result of that policy is more  women are employed by the vertebrae mhm  but when a house is actually on fire  right if someone is lying on the floor  choking and they need  a fireman to lift them and carry them  out of the building right it doesn't  matter if you're a man or a woman that's  that's the task confronting you you know  now i say this honestly um  look i'm gonna go further i think if you  have a human heart  you have to have mixed feelings about  this there has to be part of you  that wishes we could have a fire  department that's 50 men and 50 women or  55 45 that's nearly 50 50. that would be  better that would be good you know i  it would be a better world if that were  possible and it's difficult to have the  sort of uh sound foil  you know  to just accept living in a totally  unequal world we say well the only  really thing that matters for this job  is that you can lift and carry someone  out of a fire  and if we need people who have that kind  of brute strength and who are willing to  work at this relatively low wage you  know because again there are women who  can do that but they may be olympic  athletes  they may be working  just as fitness models or what have you  they have all kinds of different job  opportunities in front of them the tiny  minor women who could compete at that  level  and then you then you end up with a 100  male workforce in some of these jobs  with that being justified paradoxically  by a commitment to gender equality  so this is the sense in which  the idea of  moral realism  remains interesting and worthwhile to  contemplate and philosophize about it  and so on and so forth even if it's  false  right so  even if  the claim that women and men are equally  strong  is false i.e when you look at a  population of 10 million people how many  women are strong enough to do the job of  environment and how many men are the  available labor pool it's not equal  right  but there's still a sense in which it's  interesting we're talking about whether  or not we ought to politically organize  the fire department on the basis of of  gender equality  um  in this same way  i think the the perennial appeal in  every sense of the word perennial the  perennial appeal of moral realism is  that the world would be a better place  and that our own lives would be better  as individuals just in our own  psychology their own reflections their  own thoughts and dreams and so on in our  own private reflections and referee that  it would be better  if we lived according to this fixed  standard if we lived according to this  notion of  of moral realism  now i've already said  that's not what i believe i i don't  subscribe to i don't support that that  tenant or that  claim  uh but i think it's interesting enough  and i think it's important enough to  really be taken seriously  and  it's sort of like ethical cantianism  in that no matter how laughable it might  be no matter how easily refuted it might  be um  it is something that's perennially going  to come up again and again what do i  mean by uh cantonism  specifically in ethics one of the ideas  kant is most famous for emmanuel kant  is that um now this i'm just thinking  this video is going to be demonetized  because i pronounced his name kant  rather than can  [Laughter]  uh one of his most influential ideas is  that  what is immoral for  one person to do  uh is immoral for everyone to do that  if you wouldn't approve of everyone  doing a certain action then you  shouldn't  do it yourself so  if you feel that you personally would  prefer not to fight in the war  but you think it would be unethical for  everyone to refuse to be drafted to  fight in the war  this is a sort of kantian problem was  very simplistic now look you know as i  said this is actually very very easy to  refute  not everyone is a medical doctor not  everyone has two legs there are actually  very good reasons why the the moral  standards and decisions  that apply to me or that i make may not  apply to another person  there are real reasons for  subjective factors to to intervene why  you in particular may be justified in in  making a moral decision that you would  disapprove of in in others so it's but  still you know i think that a lot of  people do live  with um  frankly an almost magnetic sense  of  being moved and guided by that kind of  kantian way of thinking  if i couldn't approve of someone else  doing this action how dare i  approve of doing it myself this comes up  a lot many years ago we talked about  minimalism  on the channel it was probably because i  had one supporter of the channel shout  out to jake eames who was very consumed  by this at the time um you know there  are people who really are consumed and  haunted by this notion that oh well i  wouldn't approve of someone else using  this disposable bag using this  disposable light bulb using this  disposable plastic spoon you know i  wouldn't approve of a million people or  a billion people doing this thing that  has some  negative ecological uh outcome therefore  i have to live my whole life devoted to  basically coming into a kind of  consistency with what i think an  idealized person should do and what i  think should be universally prescriptive  behavior behavior or requirements that  all people  want to follow so again this is an  example of something that you know uh it  does it does haunt people now again it's  been many many years ago i don't have to  go into it now from my perspective it's  childishly simple to overturn but even  if i overturn it it still matters people  still means that people still has  consequence people's lives uh  well if you have just signed up to fight  in the us army against the taliban if  you're in the middle of that war  yeah you have to be willing to eat food  that comes in disposable packaging  right so mre is the abbreviation which  stands for meals ready to eat  war involves plastic forks and plastic  knives do you want to win this war or  not you know now there are a lot of  other ethical compromises you make in  war but if you are making the commitment  that it's worthwhile for you personally  and for uh  i don't know 20 other men or in your  battalion or something you think it's  worthwhile for you to go to this small  village in afghanistan and fight this  battle  it's completely preposterous for you to  lose the battle  or or indeed surrender to the other side  because you will not use the plastic  fork you will not use a plastic knife  you will not use disposable packaging  for your food well guess what this can  be generalized i want to write a book  i'm going to use up a bunch of pencils  and paper you know now it's not the case  my situation i don't disapprove of other  people using pencils and paper i don't  disprove other people using plastic  forks but for many people they're  committed to a minimalist  ideal and they're not thinking of this  in a way that is relative to the goal  they're pursuing or the outcome they're  pursuing they're instead thinking of it  in this cantian way uh generalizing uh  you know to this massive extent about  what all humanity uh ought to do and  then they feel beholden to this notion  of what all humanity they ought to live  up to it or live down to it as a kind of  minimum standard  i'm looking at the uh  comments here but i don't think there's  anything here that should should  derail my monologue i do see your  comments coming guys i appreciate them  if you have a second hit the thumbs up  button it'll help people find the video  both while it's being uh recorded and  after melissa you want to jump in  it is a very minor thing but minor major  hit it i felt there was no good time for  me to interrupt your monologue but  a gender neutral term for firemen would  be firefighter ah firefighter right why  don't you put on these lights once you  put on that one and that one because  it's getting dimmer now we actually have  the snow falling and the one right above  you  yeah  uh  yeah that's good that's enough okay  um  okay i'll read and respond to some of  these comments but if there's anything  else you want to say but if you want to  want to jump on that um i'm happy to  hear it i'm happy to be distracted  yeah  uh  it's a good point you know  when people think in generalities about  feminism about the quality of right  gender  that's a very good example to use  just  yeah i respect that  right well look you know people at a  very deep level they want to presume  that the more generalized argument is  the more powerful it is the closer they  come to writing a law of physics you  know that someone's a universal axiom  and you have to with maturity appreciate  that the opposite is true the more  precise and particular and incisive your  arguments are the more particular so one  of my ex-girlfriends this is many many  years ago before i'd uh met melissa  before i met the woman who became my  first wife and my first ex-wife many  many years ago  i remember she asked me a challenging  question about how i would teach  morality to my own daughter if in future  i i had a daughter  and um  she sorry i'm forgetting the precise  word she used but she meant morality in  relation to sex before marriage  in relation to whether or not you'd have  an abortion if you got accidentally  pregnant morality in this province which  you know stereotypically and actually is  very often something the father sits  down and talks to with the daughter and  the answer i gave her really shocked her  and really  impressed her and i said it pretends  the answer i gave her was it depends on  the particular girl  and i was able to say i knew her and i  knew her sister to some extent i said  look at you  and look at your sister  you're blood-related and you grew up in  the same household and you're such  totally different people  what i would have to say to you about  sexuality and ethics and what have you  like you know if you were my daughter or  what have you  it's totally different from what i would  say to your sister  and it's true they were they were two  sisters who were really very very  different people now as you can imagine  the conversation went further from there  but i was making the fundamental point  that what would be  really traumatic and difficult to deal  with for one  girl  is something that would another would  kind of take in stride and laugh at and  wouldn't uh wouldn't be flummoxed by or  wouldn't be wouldn't be slowed down by  it all there really are in this province  it's worth time but there are things  that are really really different now i  talk about this sort of thing in my book  um  using some much more erudite and less  sexy you know um allegories and and  metaphors  but um  you know how you teach politics to  someone who has a tremendously energetic  risk-taking character  someone who is willing to and maybe  someone who already repeatedly has  risked their life by committing to an  extreme course of action in politics  that may be very different from how you  teach politics to someone who's  fundamentally a lazy  a lazy stubborn uh conflict avoiding  person you know we can come up with any  number of people but you know if i'm  really teaching politics i'm really  teaching morality if i'm really teaching  philosophy  what if the most important thing to  recognize isn't this objective and even  transcendental sense of right and wrong  good and evil what if what's really  powerful is understanding in this  particular and incisive and analytical  way you know who i'm teaching and to  what and what outcome you know so and  this  what i've just said to you it doesn't  come to anyone naturally  this is not  there's old man's wisdom here i think  nobody nobody realizes this at say age  11  and then maybe a few people realize it  at age 16 and more people realized age  26 oh wow because i think it is really  natural no matter what your upbringing  whether you're raised christian muslim  buddhist hindu  or totally nihilistic atheists uh i  think it's natural to cling to that idea  of a law of physics even if you don't  have the words for that you didn't grow  up without your tradition something  that's true for everyone at all times no  exception that that's that's strength  that's power and not this um  not this business of being like a tailor  and when someone walks into your tailor  shop and they say they want to buy a  shirt  you don't say oh well this is the best  shirt you start by taking a look at them  it's like okay what's the right shirt  for you i've got to tell you  that seems weak from a childish  perspective or from a teenage  perspective but you get more mature and  you realize that's the real strength  that matters  our ideas of standardized education yes  that's that's a really deep point  actually sorry go on yeah yeah yeah  my education and  seeing how  if i would have had the right inputs how  i would have approached things  differently uh  in  innumerable ways um but because the  education was standardized because we  all had to reach these benchmarks at the  right time  um  yeah i i  no no i mean you're right  the what i was saying as a kind of law  of physics mentality really it's much  more directly an extension of  the standardized system of education  mentality yeah  and certainly when i was growing up i  was really keenly aware of that that um  our sense of what was right and wrong as  children was in large part based on how  we felt the teachers ought to behave how  they ought to treat us how and you know  even though we were aware of things that  were unfair you know that we you know  and it's very easy as a child think well  we ought to all write the same exam and  it all ought to be graded fairly for all  of us these are some of the first  meditations on justice and injustice  that we have as children and their um  their influence lacks uh lasts a very  long time yeah  yeah absolutely i mean how do you how do  you grade all essays in the class this  name i mean  when it's something creative  well let's give just two really simple  examples you know aristotle is very  interested in the question of uh at what  age do you teach math to a child at what  age do you teach spelling reading and  writing at what age you teach music to a  child now basically every country in the  world coming with a standardized system  of education that well the correct  answer is it's not going to be the same  for all children right like really you  know if you're working on a system of  one-to-one tutorial whereas one tutor  working with one child for each of those  subjects  maybe this child can start learning math  at age six and this one at age four and  this one at age eight and you know  genuinely for their benefit i don't just  mean pandering to them or something like  where really it's not the same but  physical education  i saw an interview with a guy who became  an olympic athlete  i'm sorry i forget all the sports he  played but he was in he was in many  different sports and he was so enormous  compared to children his own age that  parents would complain why do you have a  child from the eighth grade playing with  the fourth graders you know i mean like  when he was in fourth grade people  assumed he was many years older than the  children and then just a couple years  later the complaints instead from  parents were why is there an adult  playing with the children why is there a  grown man  so he was someone who went through  puberty at a very very early age  relative to the other other kids in his  grade and he was something of a giant  and as i say went on to become become an  athlete well  you know yeah if you're training someone  as an individual if you're training  someone even just for a sport that's one  thing and when instead you have a  standardized system of education okay  so grade four now we're all gonna learn  volleyball well you know maybe some  people were ready to learn volleyball  two years earlier and some tears like  you know uh  these are simple and crude things but  unfortunately the implications are  actually deep and vast  and uh and go on go on forever they go  on for the rest of their lives so yeah  somebody was making a comment about um  equality versus equity  um and left-wing feminism and so on and  so forth well  yeah i think this is probably  this is deep and shallow at the same  time the way that most people are  thinking about equality most of the time  has to do with the education system  either how their teachers did treat them  or how they thought their teachers ought  to treat them you know either what the  exams really were or what the exams  ought to be that there should be one  standard  for everyone at all at all times and  yeah i think that does actually get to  the root of um  you know the belief in  objective morality about good and evil  being objectively real wouldn't it be  reassuring if the difference between  good and evil had this same kind of  quality um  which again is introduced to us in this  convincing and coercive way  by the formal education system  okay interesting question from bonjour  trieste or no i'm sorry bonjour  uh  distinction what's the difference  um  bonjour tristes asks quote is the main  meaningful difference between a moral  absolutist saying their stance is law in  a nihilist  staying their subjective stance ought to  be law that the nihilist is capable of  changing his or her position okay so  great question  i wonder if you've read some chapters of  my book i'm writing a book that's not  published yet but i've shared some  chapters if not you will very much find  the answer to this question in my book  and i'm wondering if you've read the  book because your your  way of phrasing the question is kind of  right up my alley it's very much how i  like to to to deal with these things uh  so in my book no more manifestos there  are some portions of the book that are  negative in the sense of explaining to  you  explain you what it is i'm opposed to  what it is i'm against explaining to you  what is bad and evil and wrong  but there are also portions of the book  that i think are very clearly  marked out as positive or i'm telling  you look this is what my philosophy is  about positively not just these are the  advantages of my philosophy the cell's  going to make your life better  but positively this is this is what i'm  preaching in this in this sense  and um  the positive aspects of nihilism are  explained in one chapter so in a sense  the whole book is talking about nihilism  but some chapters more than other  um has a lot of ground to cover uh the  book  but one of the chapters expresses it in  an a protracted allegory of two bakeries  one bakery that's run by true believers  and one that's run by nihilists so this  is a hypothetical thought exercise that  will never exist  uh in the real world  but the bakery that is run by believers  they they believe they know  what good bread is they believe they  know what a good croissant is they  believe they know what a good brioche is  they have a sort of written constitution  they have a tradition they're beholden  to and they say there is one way  to bake this product  and we have to live up to that standard  we're beholden to that standard forever  so their idea of good bread  is not based on what the customers like  it doesn't change from one decade to the  next or one month to the next about what  uh customers like another good example  be a birthday cake like they can just  keep on making birthday cakes the same  way and it's not gonna change the  passion right they have a notion set in  stone now this may sound preposterous  but if you know people in cuisine  plenty of people  are like this they'll tell you they run  a traditional hungarian bakery  uh what have you you know um uh they'll  tell you you know uh that they  we at this bakery carry on the uh  tradition of uh parisian bread from the  such and such arundi's mall from the  such and such century you know they have  a they have a specific notion of baking  of the art of baking that they are  working hard to continue and promulgate  for future generations and they don't  care if it's out of style they don't  care if it's popular they don't care if  that's not the kind of bread people want  to eat and it's not the kind of brioche  people want to eat  um  and you know i present there in a  sophisticated way the type of doubt  that nihilists live with and then the  type of innovation that comes out of  that doubt where you are willing to say  to yourself even with something as as  tangible as  bread  well i don't know  what  good bread is  and i don't know what the right recipe  is  for the winter of 2022 i'm not sure  we're doing this the right way i'm not  sure we're approaching  this problem the right way i'm willing  to ask new questions i'm willing to do  do research i'm willing to innovate and  i'm willing to experiment and my  experiments may have risks involved  right like i'm willing to try things  that are new  and different and i'm willing to fail a  few times before i i get it right  so um  you know you've asked a good question is  it just that the nihilist is capable of  changing and now by the way the  relationship between belief and law the  relation between nihilism and law  many chapters in my book talk about that  in great depth so  if you read the whole book you'll know  everything i have to say about law  the justice system the court system the  police the constitution and belief and  nihilism being kind of possibly this is  a huge portion of what the book deals  with although the book is also in large  part a thesis on the philosophy of  education  and the reform of education so it has a  lot to cover  um  well you know okay  change  change is objectively real  progress is a shadow of our  ideologies  um  it's a shadow cast by our ideological  convictions i might say to be more  precise  what about innovation  what is the most important difference  um  is the willingness to innovate and even  the the desire and the motivation  to innovate right  and um  you used the term moral absolutist i  actually haven't used it in the video  before reading your your totally fine  internet it was just not thermos yes  um when when you think about moral  absolutists what is the role for  innovation  from the perspective of moral absolutism  now  look at the taliban  it's not a lot of capacity for  innovation there and you know for long  centuries you can look at the catholic  church and you know these may seem like  cartoonish examples of moral absolutism  when you know people on a one-to-one  basis um they may have forms of moral  absolutism that are more  i don't know they fit more seamlessly  into our 21st century liberal society  but nevertheless um the  their in their lack of capacity for  innovation their reluctance to innovate  indeed what i said begin this video the  reluctance to regret anything so there's  a lot of other significance of the  reluctance to look back on mistakes and  work right  this is a big  big difference that has big implications  for people's lives as individuals and  when you scale it up and and talk about  society as a whole  you want to see something  yeah just getting back on the topic of  the man who who supported paul pop that  support of the khmer rouge  um  and how  still i think today uh communism tends  to have this revolutionary quality to it  that it's a new  thing at least to me like i still think  it has this um  but it is not annihilus  it is not a nihilistic idea communism it  is not an ideology still and it has all  the problems of uh you know committing  to an ideology of belief in  systems so um  i guess i don't really have a question  so i can formulate this question though  no i i see what you're getting at so  look um  i'm gonna talk about communism  economically because it's more palpable  the same way i was talking about bread  as something you can see and touch but  what i'm about to say is not merely true  about economics it's true of religion  and not just political ideology also  uh  when you go to  the grocery store  and you see 10 different brands of  orange juice or maybe 20 different  brands of orange juice depending on  where you are in the size the coaster  see many different varieties of orange  juice it is very easy for a communist to  say it's very easy for a marxist to say  that orange juice would be cheaper  and the economy would be more efficient  as a whole if the government shut down  19 out of the 20 orange juice companies  centralize the production and  distribution of orange juice so you get  just one national orange juice company  right and then you can imagine the  advantages in terms of economies of  scale in terms of reduced waste better  distribution  and you can look into it there will be  some advantages not dramatic in terms of  production because ultimately there were  farms that are growing oranges and there  were factories processing processing  into juice but you can say okay now we  can reorganize all these things  and in the short term  you can uh you can  gain an advantage in efficiency maybe  you can produce cheaper orange is real  the problem is this is just one  step this is just a single stage of  analysis this is just a single stage of  transformation it's much more difficult  to see  that over a period of 50 years  genuinely the free market competition  between 20 different orange juice  companies that actually is  producing the possibility of innovation  all the time  just mentioned i said producing the  possibility of innovation it's possible  there's no innovation it's possible but  i can't say it makes innovation  inevitable  uh  there is some innovation there is some  adaptation going on all the time and  when you close that down then instead  you have none now just say an example i  talked about in my channel years ago  was the indigenous religion of taiwan  so the the religion of the indigenous  people of tamwon prior to the arrival of  christian missionaries which by the way  is not the same  as what religion was in mainland china  at that time very different people  speaking a different language a  different culture so on and so forth now  the indigenous religion they had  was  so horrible  that you can easily make an argument  that their quality of life improved by  converting to christianity i'm not going  to get into details  uh you might  for the sake of hypothetical argument  you can just imagine the most horrible  religion in the world where christianity  is a is a positive alternative in terms  of people's actual lived experience  okay um  this is a single stage of analysis right  even though christianity and even the  total conversion of society let's say  like society let's say they embrace  christianity to the same extent as the  dark ages in europe full-on medieval  repressive controlling exchange okay  with just a single stage of analysis  we can talk about the advantages  but over 50 years and over 500 years  what you're losing is the potential for  innovation  that actually the best thing for the  people of taiwan  and the best thing for the people of  ancient greece in ancient rome is if  you're going to have religion to have 20  different religions all competing with  each other each one criticizing the  other and you know and really i mean  competing it's can often be in a very  direct sense where you know one religion  invites you to attend a feast or a  ceremony they say oh no no i can't go  because there's this other religion with  this other german and they really make  the case oh no no you should come to our  religion not that one ours is you know  now of course for me as a nihilist you  can talk about i mean then you have a  very different question would you be  better having 20 um competing and  relatively weak religions or zero have  absolutely everyone subscribed to the  philosophy of isolazard  fortunately this is not a real world  problem you know the reality is we have  a choice between do you want to have a  society like saudi arabia or do you want  to have a society like the united states  of america or denmark  where the philosophy of azeroth gets to  compete with  many other religions now again  unfortunately united states of america  it's not 20 small religions the  christian church is enormous and very  powerful and then you get  it's ev  it's not as bad as saudi arabia but  very very far from ideal  indeed anywhere you might live  uh take a look at um  uh oh  how simian is in the audience what a  joke  [Laughter]  they let you out of the out of the psych  ward huh pow i haven't heard from in a  long time  [Laughter]  ah right so this is pretty good so babe  um  uh  if you live in utah and you want to put  your kids into a school how many schools  do you have to choose we know in utah  you have mormon  but probably you tell you've got mormon  catholic and maybe one or two protestant  domination that's all i'm saying is the  the number of religions that are at that  level of uh  institutional development and frankly  economic power it's the amount of money  they have the amount of amount of you  know  amount of land they own these kinds of  things uh and you know i don't i used to  be a buddhist i used to be a teravata  buddhist and i had to ask the question  well where are buddhists supposed to  send their kids to school you know and  you know where in america is there a  teravata buddhist um school your  children can attend so no now terrible  buddhism does exist within america it's  not zero  but it's incredibly marginalized and  buddhists have to make hard choices  about that but where they're going to  send their kids to school so no this is  just to uh  make it palpable make it make it easily  understandable but yeah many parts of  the united states you're down to just  two or four churches that have any kinds  of power and although that'll be  different from one one part of america  the other certainly um you know i heard  an autobiographical statement from  somebody recently whose childhood was  totally dominated by scientology and he  grew up in in just the right  neighborhood of los angeles his parents  chose to live their attention where  scientology was this dominant force in  people's lives it was sent to  scientology schools scientology is a  dangerous cult in case you didn't know  it really is it really is a terrible  religion  so yeah what um what those choices are  we'll will differ from one place to the  other  um  anyway yeah  so  i'm pointing out the difference in in  terms again this video as i've phrased  it is contrasting um  moral realism  to  nihilism and i should talk about moral  aestheticism kind of in between  and what exactly that means but the term  used here by uh bonjour tristes  is  uh asking about  moral absolutism  and yeah i think i've i've illustrated  now sufficiently what the negative  knock-on consequences are of moral  absolutism even when there is a  short-term advantage so now melissa  raised the issue of communism communism  is a very useful example because  communists are moral absolutists they're  not moral relativists et cetera et  cetera they're you know it's it's a  system of moral absolutism and they they  do indeed believe there's a sort of  transcendental  and eternal sense of of good and evil  right and wrong  i know too much about marxism so i can  now digress into the details of the  arguments they would make against that  claim but anyway i'm i'm not going to  you know  um  uh but yeah as i say in the same sense  that communism snuffs out the  competition  between different brands of orange juice  by giving you just one brand of orange  juice they're also snuffing out the  competition between a lot of different  ideas  um  [Music]  ideologies political ideas philosophies  beliefs  and you know the capacity for  criticism and doubt  and cross-examination to break beliefs  and assumptions apart and challenge them  with something new so in that sense it's  it's a sort of classical old-fashioned  uh  form of moral absolutism that has these  terrible disadvantages  um  okay so  i've made the concession that i do think  that moral absolutism is  uh  it's worth thinking about and it's worth  taking seriously i don't think the  excuses people make for gambling are  really worth thinking about where things  are so i don't think the excuses people  make for smoking marijuana or eating  meat or thinking about or things  seriously and again i admit there's this  one person i know on the internet where  it really did sort of disturb me to see  that he went from  uh espousing  more relativism moral aestheticism he  switched sides  and went back to saying that he instead  believes now in immoral absolutism and  by the way he didn't uh convert to  christianity or islam or anything like  that there were there were no religious  trappings um but he he switched over to  the view that differences between right  and wrong are fixed and real in the same  sense that the laws of physics are fixed  and real and these  you know the law of gravity uh is  eternal uh regardless of what opinions  human beings might make up about it now  i'm going to argue against my own  position  i think the reluctance to deal with  nihilism and to deal with moral  aestheticism i'll hear get into a little  bit more moral aestheticism is almost  nihilism but not quite it's going 80 or  90 of the way towards uh total nihilism  i think it is identical to  our reluctance to feel regret  um  if you believe that there is one  standard of beauty that is true at all  times and at all cultures for all people  if you think that the difference between  something being beautiful and something  being ugly is real in the same way that  the law of gravity is real in the same  way that uh different principles of  geometry are real  at all times for all people  um  you can look back at the history of the  world  and you can regret  periods of time when people were in  error  or when the vast majority of people are  an error but you're only regretting it  sometimes not all the time  you then also get to feel the joy and  exaltation or affirmation of your own  ego when you feel that  the tide of history is on your side or  whatever you want to say  um uh when you feel that the opinions  and values of your fellow human beings  are affirming your own position  um  again there are many things about this  that are ridiculous  if you believe there is one  set of aesthetic ideas that define what  is good in architecture  well there are many centuries in the  history of china when people's idea of  what good architecture was is totally  contrary to your own you're claiming  it's immortal and true for all people at  all times but people are capable of  living in an error about it for  centuries or perhaps forever  um and they can be an error in fifty  percent of the world and not the other  fifty percent of the world and the fifty  percent of the world that's wrong  doesn't see any advantage in the figures  that's right it does lead to some very  strange connotation  but by contrast you know my position  of nihilism means that you're basically  always looking back and regretting and  doubting  everything  that you're living your life with this  kind of profound openness to the  possibility that you are wrong  and that you don't really know what's  right and you don't know what the right  decision was  and all you can really do is analyze  what the presuppositions were  however aside however stupid and however  brilliant that went into why people made  the decisions that they did at the time  whether you're talking about yourself or  about other people i'll give you an  example of how this really is part of  our our day-to-day life  because obviously most people do not  talk about architecture this way  i've met some who do  i've known some architects i've known  some people who talk about architecture  passion there are people who talk about  the history of architecture that way and  sculpture and art there are there's a  whole department for those people at the  university  and it's not the department of  psychology it's not the psych ward  um  you know it's very comforting for people  to be able to look back at the history  of the last 10 years now and say that  clearly  um  there is a morally real difference  between donald trump  and hillary clinton  that clearly  uh the morally good person or the  morally better person as an objectively  real fact was hillary clinton and that  clearly the morally  again in this in this sense of something  being real in the same way that one of  the laws of physics is real that you  know the real truth is that people ought  to have  uh voted for for hillary clinton and not  for for donald trump  well i don't live my life that way i  don't think that way not even in my  private thoughts and not even with my  conversations with with close personal  friends  um i i most of you probably also know  some very bad things about hillary  clinton i know some very bad things but  because  i know some things that are some kind of  terrifyingly immoral decision decisions  she made  uh before she became a candidate for  president i know some terribly immoral  things she did before her husband bill  clinton became president and uh yes yes  y'all she made some shockingly immoral  decisions  during her competition with bernie  sanders  for who would be the candidate to become  president united states ah how quickly  we forget but if you're drawing up an  assessment of hillary rodham clinton's  ethical character and then you're making  predictions about what kind of president  the united states you would have been or  what the consequences of that would have  been there are really worrying really  terrifying signs that she could have  been even worse than donald trump i'm  not joking  now my point here is not that i'm right  and you're wrong my point is that i  don't know  and that i'm willing to live with that  doubt  i'm willing to live with a kind of  perpetual doubt and perpetual regret  this is many steps beyond skepticism  this is nihilism you know and again even  if i'm just talking to a personal friend  i mean even i'm talking about mother or  something like there's no political con  i'm not performing for an audience and  what i'm just thinking to myself i do  not think in terms of dogmatic certainty  that way i don't look back at something  as obvious as the election of donald  trump and say oh well that was obviously  a disaster because donald trump is  obviously an evil and immoral and stupid  person and obviously there is some  objectively real you know sense in which  the morally right thing to do was to  vote for uh hillary clinton or the  morally right thing to do uh sorry sorry  or that there's some  real sense in which  hillary clinton is  uh morally good again with the word real  meaning like the laws of physics and  that's not just uh so that's not just  known or measurable objectively  something that really exists at all  times in all cultures that's not  relative to my subjective judgment it's  not relative to my taste it's not  relative to the times we're living in  it's not relative to the objective  you're trying to pursue right like if  you're recruiting people to play on your  basketball team who is the best  basketball player that's maybe relative  to me and my taste but it's also  relative to  uh the objective stated of who can uh  shoot a basketball i do not know if  hillary clinton is better on a  basketball team than donald trump but  obviously this framework provides us the  very different set of yes in some ways  objective uh measurements about uh who  is good and who is bad and so on so you  know uh  my point is this in the same way that  people live their lives with an almost  magnetic  feeling  of being drawn to some of these  principles uh from the kantian  traditions this idea of you know what's  what you claim to be true for yourself  ought to be something that's true for  all people if you feel something is good  for you it should be good for everyone  and so on and so forth that you wouldn't  ever do an act that you would consider  evil for someone else to do  uh so on and so forth um  you know likewise i think that people  want to escape from  this sense of doubt they want to escape  from this sense of regret and so that  drives them toward  the belief in  objective morality thinking that  morality is uh is objectively real  oh i'm just taking a second to glance  your comments melissa if you want to  want to chime in now um  so uh  rafa in the audience welcome to the  audience ref i don't remember uh talking  to you and um ever  but anyway i'm sorry if you've been here  before i don't recall your your name and  your your photograph yourself rafa asks  quote as a nihilist do you think that  there is a moral imperative towards  innovation isn't that a belief to  improve society and humanity as a whole  is good so rapha the kinds of decisions  you have to make as a nihilist  are of the following kind would you  rapha prefer to go on vacation  in thailand or saudi arabia  now i am not here making the claim that  in any this is a good example for moral  realism  is thailand a morally good country we  could raise a whole lot of different  questions to controvert the claim that  thailand is morally good they have a  very high rate of murder a very high  rate of prostitution a very high rate of  drug use alcoholism there are a lot of  social problems in in thailand  um  all right we we can go into a critique  of  you could even go into the advantages  that saudi arabia has over over thailand  i've met people who lived and worked in  saudi arabia i  i don't know if i could say any of them  liked it but they did recognize that  there were advantages to to living there  well you know the decision i have to  make is where am i going to go on  vacation and despite all the problems  thailand has including problems with the  actual  you know design of its parliament its  military the power and control of the  royal family in contrast to the military  and the elected assistant government uh  so we i really sorry i know a fair bit  about politics more than most white  people speak english okay i can i can  tell you all these things that are wrong  with thailand  i'd rather go on vacation in thailand  you know now what if i have to live  there for five years would i have to  live there for 10 years you know would  you rather live for 10 years in thailand  or 10 years in saudi arabia  now let's  ask the question of what if you are a  citizen  of  denmark  do you want the future of denmark to be  more like saudi arabia or be more like  thailand these are the questions we we  get into  now um  again it's totally fine i don't mind the  challenge  you you ask about improving society okay  in terms now sometimes  the limits of the language being what  they are i do use the word improvement i  don't treat this as a word i refuse to  use for some  logical reason or something  you know for some as some philosophical  parlor trick you know i'm not afraid of  the word improvement but what i'm saying  to you sincerely is this if you're  working in a bakery  and you want to try something new and  you want to try something different  you don't know  whether it is an improvement or not  innovation  really is incompatible with the concept  of improvement even though you know we  treat them as almost synonymous like you  want to have innovations in the system  of education well are those innovations  going to be an improvement or not  they're going to be an experiment and an  experiment by definition is something  where the outcomes are unknown so  if i'm running a bakery  i can try 12 different things this month  and i can fail  12 times before coming up with a recipe  that really works on the 13th time you  know  that's innovation  all right  now  i do not think  stasis is an option  i don't think saudi arabia  has the option  to stay the same i don't think  afghanistan has the option to stay the  same i think afghanistan's going to  change  i think saudi arabia is going to change  whether they want to or not you know  and i think the united states of america  is going to change i think denmark is  going to change i think thailand is  going to change  so  without any of these ideological  preconceptions or commitments that  belief entails  yes i am willing to put my paddle down  by the side of the canoe and i'm willing  to row i'm going to lend my strength  to the struggle to move this boat in one  way or another  but i do not believe in a fixed standard  of good  and i don't even believe that what is  good  is  knowable  you know  and out of this doubt  comes a complex and i think useful  political philosophy that we can apply  in different cases on the scale of a  society of millions of people living  together on the scale of a small town  that maybe five thousand or ten thousand  people living together and this also has  implications for how we live with our  own husbands and wives boyfriends and  girlfriends  with our own small circle of friends and  colleagues  living with that kind of that kind of  doubt  now i'd say also this has come up before  about an hour ago  i think it's interesting that culturally  we pre we perceive a character who has  no doubts as strong but i think that is  misperceiving weaknesses strength  someone who clings to an axiom or a  principle  um  clings to a fixed notion or fixed set of  values i'm saying that the real strength  is actually that ability to adapt and  doubt and innovate and experiment  and and deal with the consequences now  um  it's an extreme example  but it's i think a useful one briefly  let's go back in time just to the year  2016.  what was the best thing  for americans to do for the future of  afghanistan in 2016.  what would be good for the american army  for the american government i'll tell  you one thing you need a lot going back  just that short time just going back  2016. right you need a lot of really  radical fundamental  openness  to regretting the decisions you made in  the past to looking back at the  decisions you've made starting in  september 11 2001. we go all the way  back to the 1970s a u.s policy in  afghanistan afghanistan pakistan india  china they're all linked u.s u.s policy  in central asia can you know okay you  can go back a long way and go back to  the 1970s and start regretting  the decisions you made that could lead  to a brilliant new plan a brilliant new  strategy for what to do in afghanistan  central asia pakistan pakistan matters a  lot you know okay  or  you can live your life as a kind of  moral absolutist you can live your life  based on belief and for many people that  is how they live you can live with a  refusal to regret the decisions that  were made as recently as 2001 a refusal  to look back and regret the decisions  that were made in 1971.  afghanistan involves  decisions a refusal to regret the  decisions that were made six months  earlier right  well if i had been involved  in american military planning and  american political strategy for  afghanistan central asia pakistan india  china for that part of the world  you can imagine i would have been the  guy in the room saying hey hey  let's really go and question our  presuppositions here guys  and  even at the level of a thought  experiment to be willing to sit there  and hypothetically think out well look  guys up to this point up to the year  2016 we've been totally dependent on  pakistan as our strategic ally  uh  [ __ ] pakistan  what if we make pakistan into our  enemies well like what let's think  through  a bold new strategy where we're fighting  against pakistan instead of fighting  with them now hashtag spoilers if you'd  done that in 2016 everything would be  different  if you've done that in 2011 everything  would  you know so i i'm choosing an example  but  my point is not the  real world outcomes of that my point  here is to highlight the willingness to  reflect the willingness to analyze the  willingness to question the willingness  to doubt and that's all predicated upon  a kind of unbelief a kind of rejection  of belief a refusal to believe in things  and  you know the idea of u.s foreign policy  being good  it's very different from the fixed  notion of good in the catholic church or  in the muslim faith the transcendental  good that the distinction between  um what's good and evil is fixed forever  by some ancient sacred text  but in practice they're not that  different  in practice there is a hush  and a sense of awe in the boardroom  meaning there is a secretness and there  is a taboo that governs what questions  can be asked and what questions will go  unasked what is thinkable and what is  unthinkable  okay so another great one i'm sorry  obviously livestream can't go on forever  but i'm happy to have these these  challenges so longtime viewer of the  channel do you want to give me the kiss  uh asks quote is the provision of  pornography for free on the internet an  improvement so i said quote i shouldn't  have because i actually did paraphrase  is it a good thing is it an improvement  for the world uh to have pornography  freely available  on the internet okay  i'm willing  to begin researching that question with  the profound assumption that i don't  know  now  japan  is in many ways a wonderful society  denmark  in many ways a wonderful society  thailand in many ways a wonderful  society  is that in part  because  they have the freedom  to produce and consume pornography or is  it despite that  like is it actually a cancer eating away  at japanese society danish society and  thai society right but i'm willing to  really examine that starting from the  presupposition that i don't know  now i think if you research it you're  going to start coming to  broad or specific  conclusions  if we are contrasting that to societies  where pornography is really forbidden  and really suppressed by the government  then we're looking at a place like saudi  arabia right now i'm not suggesting you  a simple cause and effect relationship  there and i think if you really are uh  examining this  uh i was just reading an article this  morning that was talking about actually  the problem of child pornography in  japan uh there are there are negative  aspects to pornography in japan there  are definitely negative aspects to the  knock-on effects  of pornography and  uh sex work prostitution in terms of the  attitudes men have towards women i would  say it also has negative attitudes part  of me has negative consequences for the  attitudes that at least some women have  towards men i'm really willing to  um  appreciate and analyze all these things  right  this is very different from an argument  that proceeds from belief  to belief and that's the way most of our  ethical discourse goes and that is  really the kind of prison  that a belief in moral moral realism  leads you into when you think that moral  judgments and ethical decisions  are  like transcendentally right or wrong  that they're right or wrong at all times  in all places for all people in the same  way as the laws of gravity um these  geometrical theorems and so on and so  forth um  that really leads you into this prison  where you can't engage in that kind of  questioning  also in terms of your your personal  relationships with people but in the  scale of society of millions and on an  intermediate scale as well when you  can't say look i don't know you can't  really do the research and you also  can't engage in  experimentation and innovation now i'm  going to give you a more specific  challenge back this is from do you want  to give me like this  so everywhere in the world that i know  of  basically the age at which people can  start producing pornography now is is  18.  uh i don't i think there probably a  couple places in the world where instead  it's 16  you know  um i'm not even gonna google it but you  know generally the legal age to produce  pornography is now is now 18. okay  tougher question would the world be a  better place if it were illegal to film  yourself or be filmed producing  pornography until you were  21  24  26  thirty six you know like i don't know  assumptions  you could in theory you could divide  japan into two halves  and half of japan  it's illegal to film pornography or look  at pornography where anyone is under the  age of 30  and in the other half it's 18 or 16 or  or whatever it is  now that's challenging right  if you're over the age of 30 yourself  and some of you will just say oh come on  who has sex at all when they're over 30.  you know i get it you know  but  now that's challenging now when we're  not just talking about having  pornography versus not having it but  we're talking about a very narrow sense  of the age of consent not the consent to  have sex but consent to to produce  primary ah okay and then the the knock  on effects of that now you know  my fundamental point here is i do not  begin or end that discourse by saying to  you that i know the truth and that my  conclusion about what's morally right  and morally wrong is true for everyone  at all times and always has been and  always will be and who who can say that  18 is the right age you know who can who  can say that it's quite a recent thing  that 18 emerged as the as the standard  you know uh still in some parts we can  get married at 14 you know uh even  within the united states people getting  married at 14.  think about the implications of that  people are getting tattoos at different  ages too you know and you know there is  a counter argument if you keep letting  people delay making  decisions with these these tremendously  serious consequences so people don't  just go to high school they go to  university and they continue living in  their parents house and their parents  are making these decisions for them you  have the problem of the infantilization  you know of of the species basically so  look  there are  serious questions with with really  interesting  uh  implications you know  right but i'm saying my way of  approaching this really creates the the  possibility for  you know  reflecting on what you assumed in the  past and regretting it a large part of  learning comes in the way of regret it  creates the possibility for  uh  research  it creates a possibility for innovation  and the belief-based discourse or just  the perception of the world in terms of  fixed  real moral values it it prevents all  melissa if you want to jump in again i'm  just reading the comments again  yeah paul simeon says  fair point saudi arabia has great dates  this is date as a noun we need to saudi  arabia great days great coffee so a lot  of people don't know that some of the  best coffee in the world still is  produced in saudi arabia it's not what  they're famous for yeah it's true a  hummus no  you never hear about saudi arabian  falafel hummus can the saudis not get  some credit for their cuisine  vegan food in saudi arabia  so  earlier you were contrasting innovation  with  not progress but there was another  language generally um but do you think  that by using the word progress that you  inevitably have an idea of what is the  perfect  you know making progress toward  perfection or is it progress  right yeah so melissa is asking about  the uh implications and innuendo of the  word progress so arthur schopenhauer has  this great dictum that's somewhat  underrated in his significance which is  we judge every time we use a verb  it is certainly true that using the term  progress  you are revealing the fact that you  believe in a beginning a middle and an  end  some destination you're moving that  you've made a judgment  that one thing is better than the other  with that haven't been said of course  i'm not afraid of it but you should  really be mindful  um now look just today  heard a lot about  progress  toward the decriminalization of  heroin cocaine fentanyl hard drugs  progress  progress that includes the legalization  of marijuana progress that includes a  larger and larger percentage of the  population being on prescription  antidepressants you know so this is a  great example well what other people  call progress i do not call progress  so no i just in that way you need to be  mindful of it  um  you know but i mean for the most part  you just encounter that as a cynical  ploy of people to try to get you to  agree with their political views without  really mentating it without really  thinking it through sure but something  like improving the  system  of waste management here in victoria for  example it would be a sign of progress  if the waste was being directed to a  treatment a water treatment facility  rather than being developed into the  water right and in these real world  in not just you know discussions of  ideology and philosophy i think i'm i'm  i'm even more comfortable saying that  that would be progress to to  right  right but but it's not so different from  saying it's better and that's all i mean  the word progress isn't any more or real  no but the this video is about ethical  judgments  you know obviously in the case as no  conclusion is not that you shouldn't  make  ethical judgments but you've got to be  aware that you're making an ethical  judgment you know  obviously you can make an ethical  judgment that  sewage treatment is better than dumping  untreated sewage into the ocean it's  very unsurprising ethical judgment but  you know i mean many people are  flabbergasted when they find that there  are human beings who refuse to drink  water with fluorine fluoride in it you  know there are people who uh  refused to use toothpaste and so on and  they didn't realize oh this isn't just  something that's real and absolutely no  this this is a moral argument you have  to make you know that's all let's just  really understand sorry uh yeah i just  say i think that in the same sense that  i think  i think like right that is that it's  generally like  comparable to  the waste management uh becoming more  becoming a more vegan society i think is  promised  right  but that is just an ethical decision in  your head  that's the tragedy of it  and you know  if  even if nobody disagrees with you so  even if and this may be the case even if  there is nobody in our society who will  stand up and say that they think your  argument about sewage treatment is  [ __ ] like nobody will say that  but for decades here for at least 50  years that was what they because they  just refused to build a sewage treatment  planter and by the way you guys can  imagine there were complaints in the  newspapers and there were actually a lot  of complaints from the government in  seattle in america there were  international complaints because they  have to deal with the same water and  they're like look we spend all this  money doing sewage treatment and you  guys don't and we get your pollution  like washing up on our beaches  well even if nobody stood up and made a  kind of ethical or moral argument that  that's not progress or that's not good  or is not necessary in in reality  implicitly they did live accordingly so  no the point is by switching from  good from from switching from explicitly  ethical language to a more technocratic  language talking about progress you  don't escape  the relativism and the aestheticism of  your moral judgments that that's you  know that's all that comes down to that  this is your idea of what's good or  what's or what's better or what's an  improvement  now you know you can get out in the  world and you can you can make it  convincing for others you know i compare  it to singing a song  there was a guy named 50 cent he was a  rapper and he had his story to tell and  he had his song to sing and it was a  song that included rage and revenge and  violence and hatred and resentment  towards his own mother and resentment  towards the man who murdered his mother  and resentment towards his ex-wife and  memories of his own criminal past and  his time in jail you know  okay and it was also a song of hope and  desire and greed wanting to be rich you  know he made his song matter to the  whole world but it's not good  and it's not progress  and it's not necessary and there's  nothing universal about it and when i  was living in thailand at laos it was  quite funny for me to talk to people who  didn't get it look at that time 50 cent  was really still famous and it was you  know it was ongoing charts uh chart  topping hits you know we had hit songs  and hell's coming out and there were  people in in laos i remember  particularly i don't remember talking  about this in cambodia like look what  what do you people like about him what's  you know you know they would also say  things like he's ugly why do you why do  you like him so  much well we don't care that he's you  know whether or not you think he's ugly  subject plenty of women think he's  beautiful or he's handsome you know but  regardless you know what what is this  guy he's he's ugly he's a criminal he's  stupid he doesn't say anything  intelligent you know uh his you know his  his rhymes aren't particularly erudite  or what have you i remember people also  complaining that he rhymed too slowly he  didn't rap in a very fast or skillful  way like other rappers well you know no  there's nothing objectively real but  he's sang his song and he made it matter  now some political leader some demagogue  could sing a song anywhere in the world  that convinces people for a time that it  really is morally compulsory for them to  be vegan that it's morally compulsory  for them to brush their teeth that it's  morally compulsory for them to really  care much more about pollution going  into the water or the air than they do  and i say for a time for a reason  tragically it's very unlikely to last  it's very unlikely to last as long as  the muslim faith which is so many  centuries under its belt and it's still  going  um but you know  this is the sense in which that that  term moral aestheticism is i think so  terrifying  if you take  ethics morality and politics and you're  willing to admit the extent to which  these things are  you know just like the fine arts it's  terrifying nobody wants to think that  you know nobody wants to think this is  just like the question of who's going to  be the next hit rapper you know the next  fad the next fashion that there isn't a  sense of definite uh direction and and  progress you know that that there isn't  a a universal or transcendental or real  sense morally real sense  transcendentally real sense in the way  that gravity is going to continue to be  true  regardless of what we think about it  that it's instead going to be in the  realm as shakespeare says of you know  there's neither good nor evil but  thinking makes it so you know  um  now i just need to point out in terms of  regret  some of you let's say you have a friend  who was a rapper at the same time 50  cent was a rapper you might look back  and regret and say my friend was a  better rapper his lyrics were more  meaningful his story was more worthy of  being heard but your friend wasn't a  successful rapper there is no  objectively real sense in which you can  say your friend should have been more  successful  than 50 cent like you have to realize  this sort of reckless terrifying  arbitrariness not randomness but  arbitrariness with which  one man's words take on power political  power religious power symbolic power  and yeah ethical  power emotional power you know  um somebody has a song to sing  and people decide for whatever  combination of reasons that they're  going to hear it now we can analyze that  i mean we can analyze why did everyone  hate  hillary clinton so much in that one  crucial year it's for real reasons not  for no reason why did they decide to  give  donald trump a chance even if the  reasons are bad you know we can we can  weigh into that but um  [Music]  it's a very different type of regret  when you're looking at history in this  way and you're able to regret everything  endlessly  uh without the island of certainty  provided to you by moral realism by the  sense that there is you know there is a  real and true answer to each of these  questions even if nobody but yourself uh  seems to know it or agree to it  sorry i'm just catching up with your  written comments guys  so many of the things i could answer  here uh generally many of these  questions um i could say read my book  a lot of this stuff is discussed in the  book and i'm not boasting to say it's  discussed not in a way that's just  autobiographical it's not just  meaningful to me but  it is discussed in a way that can be  applied directly to the questions of  how do we organize the criminal justice  system in our time the legal system how  do we write constitutions how do we  write laws what is democracy in our time  what was it in the ancient past what  should it be in the future so these  questions are talked about in length and  with depth  with practical applications so i do  think they're talked about in a way  where it's it's going to be meaningful  for your life whoever you are as the  reader not just the meaning that  nihilism has uh for myself  there's one interesting question here  someone called t-man or perhaps tamann  says  uh quote there are indigenous cultures  that seem to reject western ontological  and epistemological true false  distinctions yet are obviously not moral  nihilists uh coming from an  anthropological perspective yes  but  you know my claim  uh my argument in favor of historical  nihilism is not on the basis that there  ever has been any culture in the history  of the world  that has been nihilistic  um  you know  quite the contrary i mean  we all should admit that you know  nihilism on the level of a society or  even of a church or a town  has never existed  it has always existed for extraordinary  individuals  individuals can become nihilists or can  become nihilus too to some extent you  just have to stop believing in things  and you know you have to you have to  start to critique and reject uh the  reasons behind belief and so on and so  on uh  you know i don't need to get into the  definition i was in this video and i've  certainly made other videos talking  about it  um  but anyway i i wonder  there's nothing wrong with you with you  uh raising that that fact  uh  i would also just point out it's  certainly something just described  discussed in the book  um  you know again in a way that's i think  useful and applicable to people's lives  nihilism is not incompatible with  coercion  nihilism is not anarchism  in order to take a positive view  of anarchy  for example the fact that you are a  nihilist does not mean that you're  opposed to the government compelling  people to brush their teeth  you know the compulsion of innumerable  kinds exists in every society i mean  again anthropologically and otherwise  uh  it exists also in every you know modern  organized  urban society  however you know to stick with that one  example  i remember reading  very serious arguments written by  specialists in that field  as to why for scientific reasons the  government of laos a third world country  should not introduce fluoride into the  drinking water and these people were not  hippies they were scientists in exactly  that field and they were really saying  that the the scientific reasons for why  fluoride was introduced in western  countries in the past those have now  been debunked that with the progress of  science now we should not be  fluoridating uh tap water uh drinking  water and so on and i  when i read that report i'd never  thought about that before i just it  never crossed my mind to question and  criticize the assumptions and you can  imagine it's one of those things like  well back in the 1950s we assumed this  this and this but then there was more  research in the 80s and now we know this  uh  again that is certainly an example where  i have not come to a conclusion  but that's it's an example where even  these things that seem self-evident seem  to be self-evidently good or something  seems to self-infinitely progress at  that time laos as a third world country  they did think of progress as being  catching up with countries like japan  countries like the united states of  america and just imitating the  technology they have and imitating the  form of social organization they have uh  well  think again you know that's that's the  the role for doubt and examination and  regret and innovation that comes from a  more more nihilistic uh perspective  a perfectly reasonable question someone  asked where am i selling my book i  assume i'm just going to put it in  english on amazon that's going to be  direct purchase of amazon  it's possible i will speak to a  publisher who convinces me to do  otherwise but uh my feeling about that  has changed over time i mean the book is  so subversive it's so anti-establishment  i mean it's it's really dissident  literature it's a  sense of being a political dissident as  soon as i read certain parts of the book  and i think why would i even talk to a  publisher no publisher can carry this  you know it's so so contrary to the the  norm in our time and i should just  accept it being a direct purchase from  amazon only but sure there are other  times frankly when i'm reading other  parts of the book because i'm doing  final proof reading here uh where i feel  the opposite that i think wouldn't it be  great to have a relatively mainstream  publisher or even just a small  political dissident publisher  carry this book and promote it so and so  forth so no i i do um  i have mixed and changing feelings of  that but i think the short answer is  amazon.com  the title of the book is indeed no more  manifestos  okay um there is plenty of humor in the  book i have a question about that from  paul simeone it does sorry if you read  the book as a whole uh  there's some parts of the book where i  think i've accomplished something great  and having the most humorous and  light-hearted hearted approach  imaginable to describing police  brutality and actual police massacres so  it deals with some very very tough uh  episodes from american recent american  political history maybe the most  light-hearted and entertaining critique  of the history of the american  constitution you've ever read also there  is humor and there's humor where i'm  mocking myself and this humor where i'm  talking about my own family background i  do have jokes about my relationship with  my now deceased father and so on there's  a personal touch to it there's a  humorous touch to it  but with that having been said you know  it's tremendously serious subject matter  and that's why i also say i kind of  despair of the possibility of a of a  publisher taking it on because it is so  serious and if you're not already  familiar with  my school of thought which most of my  readers will be from youtube like you  just imagine someone sitting with us who  hasn't yes it doesn't have any  familiarity with me i can imagine just  how just how disturbing it would be okay  so look guys um i've got also some  questions about max turner indeed as  other people said there have been many  youtube videos with max turner  some of you guys might remember this  some of you might not but years ago i  say this in closing the video this is my  wrap-up comment by the way there was  another youtube channel  and they identified as anarchist  and  i i had a kind of conflict with this  youtube channel they attacked me and  denounced me and i remember writing to  the guy and he did reply i said look why  are you being so mean to me i've  actually been quite respectful and  cordial to you while analyzing and  disagreeing with your views because i'm  not an anarchist by the way the guy um  he had been a doctrinaire anarchist he  was someone who believed in the doctrine  of anarchism he had been a dogmatic  anarchist and then he had a turning  point in his life when he read max  sterner now max sterner really isn't a  nihilist but i think some of the  questions that lead to nihilism do get  asked by max turner can lead people on  the on the path to uh making some of  these breakthroughs and their philosophy  and their critique of politics anyway so  he had this kind of unbelievably  um  [Music]  emotionally overwhelming breakdown  where he realized that for him anarchism  which had started as a critique of  religion  had just become his religion anarchism  which had started as a critique of  social conformism had instead become for  him a suffocating political ideology  that entailed some kind of uh conformism  i remember one of his ways of putting  was he realizes now  that politics  is not ultimately about being right  it's not ultimately about believing the  right things that politics  and philosophy  really are about your own lived  experience  now on some of i sympathize with the guy  you know like it's this was a real  breakthrough for him he had been an  anarchist he read max sterner and he  ended up rejecting anarchism for the  same reasons that he had formerly  rejected communism and conservatism and  most mainstream political thought in  order to embrace anarchism but now he  realizes the anarchists of itself is the  problem he has to take a further step  towards uh nihilism or at least towards  uh skepticism at that time he started  described himself as a as a as an egoist  i think he didn't say a nihilistic  egoist maybe uh something like this  started using the term the term egos and  estimates started a period of real uh uh  reflection you know yes  you know the the point of philosophy the  point of politics and the point of  political philosophy is not to have  you know a sort of checklist  of all the things that you're right  about all the things that make you  morally superior to other people  that's the point of catholicism  many parts are saying oh so uh did you  get baptized did you go through a  confirmation did you take your vows did  you attend the right ceremonies do you  believe all there are things have you  read the whole list of doctrines how can  you memorize and recite uh certain  passages of the bible oh yeah you're  going through the checklist oh these are  all the things that guarantee you now  you can feel certain that you're right  now you can feel certain that you  morally spirit other people and  intellectually spirit other people also  this is what your spirituality consists  of is a checklist and you know your  identity becomes the checklist and your  checklist becomes the identity and at  some point you don't know who you are  but you know what's right and what's  wrong you know what's morally good and  what's morally evil and in your  commitment to that knowledge and you're  clinging to that false sense of  certainty that becomes your identity and  you are before and above and beyond  everything else you are a good catholic  whether or not you're a good man  um  you know uh  it's it's laughable to me but obviously  on some level i i can sympathize  with that guy's struggle  um  you know  philosophy  ultimately is about problem solving it's  a set of problem solving tools  so how is it that so often  the problem the problem solving method  itself becomes the problem how is it  that so often uh the critique  of political institutions becomes a  suffocating and oppressive political  institution how is it that the rejection  of one political ideology so often  produces another that may be as bad or  worse  or as i said before in a very different  context it may be better  in the short term the new ideology may  be better the all the ideology just for  the next five years when you think about  it over 50 years or over 500 years it  starts to become suffocating um  starts to have these disadvantages that  may not be apparent in just a single  stage of analysis when all you're  thinking about is abolishing the old  ideology that you want to get rid of and  uh of course a terrible  terrifying example of that is to look at  what happened in the french revolution  and uh the dictatorship of napoleon  bonaparte that ensued uh afterward and  to really ask yourself what decisions  would you have made at each step of that  revolution and what would you have  regretted looking back on those  decisions just five years later or or  what have you you know knowing knowing  what i know now what should i have done  at that earlier stage of the revolution  and look i sorry just to just put a  human face on again very briefly i've  been reading a book it's actually here  on camera  this book contains some really gory  details about the american revolution  that i didn't know before uh it  describes  in the american revolution  basically the civil war between the  united states and england at that time  call it a revolution uh it describes  atrocities it describes revolutionary  violence it describes people being  tortured and some of those atrocities  uh  some of them are carried out for cynical  reasons that come up again and again in  revolutions like you're interrogating  and imprisoning people because they  happen to be wealthy and you wanna and  the revolutionaries want to steal their  wealth to use it for the revolution  [Music]  so uh  knowing what i know about that history  and looking out it's very difficult to  think about what decisions i would have  made at different stages of that  revolution  and what i would have ended up  regretting because those are decisions  you make that have you know  once you've made the commitment once  you've said the word that maybe all it  is  you don't get to change your mind now  that's the side you're on and you get to  see all the unexpected consequences of  the revolution that you're a part of of  the war that you're fighting this is  very true the french revolution  it's very true of the american  revolution  and um  you know it's very very hard  for people to look back and say these  were my reasons for fighting this war  these were my reasons for joining  revolution  but these were the unexpected outcomes  and that wasn't what i was fighting for  so this comes back again to this light  motif throughout this video of the  capacity for human regret and there's a  sense in which  you can feel responsible for the  decision you made but you can't feel  responsible for the outcomes some people  would have chosen to support the  revolution for all the right reasons but  then would be horrified by the outcomes  some people would have chosen to oppose  the revolution for all the right reasons  fight for king and country but then be  horrified by the outcomes of that and  realize where where that went and so on  for every side of the french revolution  at every stage  what terrifies me about the year 2021  2020 2021 2022 this little span of three  years what terrifies me is that nobody  perceives themselves in this way to be  in the midst of a revolution  and we are  we are living through a period of the  revolutionary  transformation of our own societies of  the planet as a whole  not even saudi arabia  can stay the same not even communist  china can stay the same not even  conservative but democratic japan not  denmark not switzerland not the united  states of america  the societies we live in  50 years from now  are going to be far more different from  what they are today  than they are today being contrasted to  what they were 50 years ago  we are in the midst of a period  of transformative social change  and one of the reasons why the  revolution is going so badly  is that so few of us  are willing  to reckon with the kind of regret that's  entailed  when we perceive ourselves  as the revolutionaries  that we really are  you